---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim39530
public_updated_at: '2016-04-01T15:13:09+01:00'
section_id: BIM39530
title: 'Foreign exchange: gains or losses: capital or revenue: terms of borrowing'
---

A **capital** borrowing is one that is:

* not temporary, and
* fixed in amount, and
* available for use for any of the trader's activities and not merely the day to day trading operations.

A **revenue** borrowing is one which:

* is temporary, and
* fluctuates (that is, it is akin to a bank overdraft facility), and
* is incurred as an incident of the ordinary day to day carrying on of the business activities.

## Interpretation: temporary borrowings

You should generally accept a period of less than a year as temporary and a period of a year or more as not temporary. This is a general guide only and not a rule to be applied rigidly.

For example, fixed amount borrowings for a period of less than a year which are systematically renewed may constitute an addition to capital. On the other hand a borrowing for more than a year which is used to meet some temporary exceptional trading expense may be on revenue account.

Lord Templeman considered in **Beauchamp v F W Woolworth plc** [1989] 61 TC 542 that to be on revenue account a borrowing must be ‘fluctuating'. It is not, however, entirely clear that previous authorities regarded this characteristic as necessarily being a condition for treating a borrowing as revenue. In practice HMRC will normally accept that short-term borrowing, incurred in connection with day-to-day trading operations, is not debarred from being on revenue account solely because it is fixed in amount.
