---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim35660
public_updated_at: '2024-03-06T09:47:15+00:00'
section_id: BIM35660
title: 'Capital/revenue divide: intangible assets: proprietor''s training courses'
---

Expenditure incurred by the owner of a business on training courses for
themselves is revenue expenditure if the course or learning either

* updates existing expertise or knowledge or
* provides new expertise or knowledge

in the individual's existing business area.

Costs incurred on training to acquire new skills or knowledge to keep
pace with advancements in technology and changes in industry practices, related
to the owner’s existing business area, will usually be allowable.

Additionally, expenditure on courses which are ancillary to the owner’s
main trade, such as introductory bookkeeping or digital skills courses may also
be revenue expenditure depending on the specific circumstances of each case.

Expenditure incurred on training that is unrelated to the business
owner’s existing business area (for example, expenditure that allows them to
start a new business or expand into a new, unrelated area of business) is
unlikely to be an allowable deduction.

In **Dass v Special Commissioner and others** [2006] EWHC2491 (Ch),
the taxpayer traded as a tutor in English and as an advisor in relation to the
bringing of appeals before various tribunals. He took a course which would have
led to a diploma in law (LL Dip) qualification and claimed a deduction for
re-sit examination fees (having missed the original examinations due to
illness). The Special Commissioner described the nature of the course:

> HMRC described the Holborn course as a “bridging course” towards
> becoming a solicitor […]. Whilst Mr Dass's pre-existing activities in part
> involved work in preparing people for hearings before tribunals, it appears to
> have been predominantly related to English, translation and education. The LL
> Dip course was clearly going to enable Mr Dass “to advocate (’clients””) causes
> in respective tribunals and Exam Boards, and equally clearly it was going to
> increase Mr Dass's legal knowledge and capabilities.

The Special Commissioner went on to decide that the fees were
capital in nature:

> I agree with HMRC
> that the particular course was one to equip Mr Dass with a new qualification
> that would have enabled him to venture into new areas of practice, [...].

In the High Court Lightman J upheld the Special Commissioner’s decision
on the capital/revenue distinction:

> The line between
> the two may often be difficult to draw, but in this case the Commissioner was
> fully entitled on the material before him to draw the line where he did. Indeed
> I think that, far from his decision being open to challenge, it was clearly
> correct.

As the taxpayer had incurred costs in an area of practice (law) that was
unrelated to their existing business (of being an English tutor), the costs
relating to the training were held to be capital and disallowed.

See [BIM42526](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim42526) for guidance on applying the business
purpose (wholly and exclusively) test to expenditure on training costs.

The examples below illustrate the types of scenarios where the cost of
training is likely to be an allowable business expense, and scenarios where the
cost is likely to be disallowed. Whether an expense is allowable will depend on
the individual facts and circumstances of each case, including the purpose of
the owner in incurring the costs. See the wholly and exclusively guidance on
purpose in [BIM37050](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim37050) and onwards.

The first list of examples below includes the types of scenarios where
the cost of training is likely to be an allowable business expense for a
self-employed individual. The second list of examples includes scenarios where
the cost of training is unlikely to be an allowable expense.

**Expense likley to be allowable**

**Example 1**

Kiran works part time as a wedding photographer. She wants to improve
her photo editing skills, so she attends an online refresher course on using
photo editing software.

As Kiran is updating her existing editing skills which are related to
her business, the cost of the course is likely to be an allowable expense.

**Example 2**

Ryan is a plumber and runs his own business. He signs up to a beginners’
bookkeeping course at his local college. Although the course will not help Ryan
with the skills he needs as a plumber, it will teach him how to keep accurate
accounting records, which will help him to run his business better.

The course will improve Ryan’s record-keeping knowledge and he will
learn skills which he needs for the purpose of running his business. The cost
of the course is likely to be an allowable expense.

**Example 3**

Tim spends his weekends selling his handmade pottery at a stall in his
local town centre and now wants to sell his pottery online. He thinks this will
help him to reach more customers, which will increase his sales. He decides to
complete an e-commerce course and then goes on to complete a short, introductory
course on website development.

Although the courses are not directly related to pottery, they will
teach Tim new, skills so that he can move his business into online selling. The
skills and knowledge Tim acquires will help him to keep up to date with the
modern ways of selling. The costs of the course are likely to be an allowable
expense.

**Example 4**

Alex is a website designer and is completing a short course on using
artificial intelligence (AI) technology so that she can add additional tools
and functionality to the websites that she designs.

The course will give Alex new expertise in an upcoming area of
technology related to her business. The costs are therefore likely to be an
allowable expense.

**Example 5**

Aditya fits gas boilers. He completes training to install heat pump
systems because he thinks he will need these skills to future-proof his
business as heat pumps are new and upcoming technology and an alternative to
gas boilers.

The cost of the training is likely to be allowed as an expense of his business
as heat pumps will replace gas boilers and Aditya is acquiring skills to keep
up to date with modern technology.

**Example 6**

Felicity is a personal trainer. She attends a course to improve her
understanding of nutrition and gains a basic qualification in nutrition.

Felicity wants to learn about good nutrition as her clients expect her
to have a basic understanding of nutrition. The knowledge that she gains will
also help her to develop better training plans for her existing clients so the
cost of the course will be an allowable expense.

**Example 7**

Aisha runs an online store selling children’s storybooks that she writes
herself. She wants to start drawing the illustrations for the books herself
because she thinks this will improve her books and save her the cost of paying
for an illustrator to create the drawings for her. Aisha therefore attends a
beginners’ course on drawing illustrations.

The cost of the course is likely to be an allowable expense because
Aisha is using her skills to improve the children’s storybooks that she
creates.

**Expense likely to be disallowable**

**Example 8**

Amari is currently unemployed but wants to become a driving instructor
and start his own business. He completes a course so that he can become an
approved driving instructor and wants to claim the cost of the course as an
expense.

Amari cannot claim the cost incurred on the course because the course
provides new skills which will help Amari to start a new business that does not
already exist.

**Example 9**

Robert runs a sportswear shop, selling branded clothing. He enrols on to
a sports science degree at his local university because he has an interest in
the field and thinks it will help him to understand his customers better.

The costs associated with the degree course will not be an allowable
expense because the knowledge Robert acquires will not specifically help him to
sell sportswear. The costs are therefore unrelated to his business.

**Example 10**

Simone is a freelance makeup artist and wants to move into the tattooing
business and open her own tattoo studio. She undertakes several tattooing
courses and wants to claim the costs as an expense.

The costs of the tattooing courses were not incurred for the purpose of
Simone’s existing business and are unrelated to her makeup artist business, so
they are not allowed as an expense.

**Example 11**

Craig is a taxi driver, but he wants to change his business and move
into the painting and decorating industry. He completes a painting and
decorating course at his local college and wants to claim the costs of the
course.

The cost of the course was not incurred for the purpose of Craig’s
existing taxi driving business and is related to the painting and decorating
business he plans to set up, so it is not allowed as an expense.
