---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim45680
public_updated_at: '2026-07-01T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM45680
title: 'Specific deductions - interest: Change in use of funds or asset'
---

This chapter applies for Income Tax purposes to the computation of trade profits and property income. References in the text to a ‘business’ should therefore be taken to include both trades and property businesses. The chapter does not apply for Corporation Tax purposes, where there are separate rules in the loan relationships legislation (see [CFM11000](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/corporate-finance-manual/cfm11000)).

S34 Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005

Whether or not interest is allowable as a deduction depends upon the use made of the borrowed funds during the relevant accounting period. This may remain the same throughout the life of the loan or it may change.

## Example 1

Blake decides to invest in some packaging machinery at a cost of £3,000 and obtains a loan of £3,000. The machine keeps breaking down and is eventually returned to the manufacturer and a full refund obtained. The refund is simply paid into the business bank account to decrease the business overdraft. The loan is no longer funding the purchase of plant and machinery but it is providing trading working capital.

Whilst the use of the loan has changed, it is still being used for the purposes of the trade. The interest payable continues to be allowable as a deduction in computing trade profits.

## Example 2

Jett borrows £25,000 to buy a car that they use privately. Jett joins a GP practice and starts to use the car for home visits, estimating that about half of their mileage is business and half is private. Both the car and the loan are included in the partnership accounts, with the full amount of interest payable appearing in the profit and loss account. One half of the interest is allowable as a deduction so the other half should be added back in computing the amount of the partnership’s profit.

In this example the car and loan are introduced into the partnership accounts. In some cases the car and loan do not appear in the partnership accounts but the tax adjustments include a deduction for half the interest. This is also allowable following the guidance at [PM163350](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/partnership-manual/pm163350) (final paragraph).

## **Example 3**

Miss R rents out a flat she owns to tenants. The interest portion of the mortgage on the property is eligible for relief, subject to the finance cost restriction rules (see [PIM2058](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/property-income-manual/pim2058)). The tenancy ends and Miss R moves into the property herself.  The interest is no longer eligible for relief as the property is no longer used for business purposes.
