---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim45690
public_updated_at: '2026-07-01T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM45690
title: 'Specific deductions - interest: Funding the business'
---

This chapter applies for Income Tax purposes to the computation of trade profits and property income. References in the text to a ‘business’ should therefore be taken to include both trades and property businesses. The chapter does not apply for Corporation Tax purposes, where there are separate rules in the loan relationships legislation (see [CFM11000](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/corporate-finance-manual/cfm11000)).

S34 Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005

A
business needs funding. A proprietor can do this by introducing money from
savings or assets that are already owned into the business. Or it can be done
by borrowing money. Once the business is up and running, it may generate cash
to meet new funding needs or to repay old loans.

When
the business is funded using borrowed money and that money is used for business
purposes the interest is allowable as a deduction in computing the trade
profits subject to satisfying the “wholly and exclusively” criteria provided by S34(1)(a) ITTOIA 2005.

If
the business borrows money against its capital assets but the ‘purpose’ of the
loan is not a business purpose, then the interest is not allowable as a
deduction.  This is because if the funds
are used for a private purpose, this fails the S34(1)(a)
ITTOIA wholly & exclusively test.

To
decide whether borrowed funds are being used for a business or a private
purpose requires examination of the underlying facts.

The
use of the money can be very clear, for example if the money was used to buy a
business asset such as plant and machinery, and factually the asset was used
solely for the business. 

In other cases, the purpose of the loan may be
less clear. For example, where a
property landlord claims a loan interest deduction on a loan used to fund
significant property maintenance expenses. This loan could have been taken out
solely to fund property maintenance of the business’s rental property or have
been taken out to fund work on the landlords own private residence; or
both. 

Interest is not allowable as a deduction if the
borrowing finances actual private spending. This is because an allowable
deduction is only permitted if it is incurred ‘wholly & exclusively’ for
the purposes of the trade or business. This is explained in more detail at
 [BIM45705](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim45705) - [BIM45725](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim45725).

However, where a
part or proportion of the loan can clearly be identified as having been
incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business this expenditure
is an allowable deduction under S34(2) ITTOIA 2005.

When considering whether interest is an allowable
deduction, it should be remembered that the borrowed money finances real cash
spending and/or the acquisition of real assets at a specific point in time. Consequently,
the deductibility of interest paid on borrowing which funds the acquisition of
assets is not affected by the subsequent depreciation or writing down or the
revaluation of an asset. So, if a loan of £5,000 is taken out to buy plant and
machinery costing £5,000, the loan continues to fund that asset even though the
value of the plant and machinery on the balance sheet falls, as it is
depreciated.

Similarly, if an asset
is revalued upwards, the revaluation is ignored when looking at the use of the borrowed
funds.

So if £120,000 is borrowed to fund the purchase of a site with a business
property valued at £80,000 and other non-business property at £40,000, interest
relating to the business property portion of the loan funding is treated as deductible (interest on £80,000). If subsequently
the business property is revalued at £100,000, we do not accept that £100,000
of the original loan should now be treated as deductible, The business asset
cost the business £80,000, and only the amount of the loan used to fund the business
property acquisition is deductible.

It is possible for an asset that is not a
business asset to appear on a balance sheet. This may not have been funded by a separate loan. If the
asset is a private asset then the interest relating to that funding is not an
allowable deduction.

#### Example 1 - Loan funding business expenditure

Ms Rashid
started a business selling stationery.  She
takes out a business loan to fund her business. Through a contact, Ms Rashid
buys in bulk from a supplier. The only start-up costs she incurred were for a
sales office, initial stock and a van to visit potential clients.

The business loan is
funding the purchase of trading assets and meeting business expenses, so the
interest is paid wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business.

#### Example 2 - Loan funding business and private expenditure

Ms Rashid
decides to expand the business by renting extra storage and taking on an
employee.  She
obtains an additional loan that she uses to fund this expenditure but also uses
a proportion to go on holiday. 

The interest
relating to the proportion of the loan used
for the holiday is not wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the trade and
is not an allowable deduction.  The identifiable
proportion used for the extra storage and wages is an
allowable deduction.

#### Example 3 - Replacement of capital

Ms
Rashid started a business selling stationery and funds the start-up of her
business from her own private funds.  She
used them to procure a sales office, initial trading stock and a van.

Two years later Ms Rashid wishes to
withdraw the capital (private funds) she had used to start up her business but
there is limited working capital in the business to support a withdrawal. She
takes out a loan for the same amount as she had initially put into the business
to facilitate personal drawings. She then used the funds withdrawn to pay
for a private holiday.

The
purpose of obtaining the funds was to facilitate a personal withdrawal of cash. In order for the interest on the loan to be
an allowable deduction it must satisfy the wholly and exclusively test provided
by S34.  As the funds are used for a
non-business purpose they do not satisfy the test and the interest is not an
allowable deduction.
