---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim40180
public_updated_at: '2016-04-01T15:13:19+01:00'
section_id: BIM40180
title: 'Specific receipts: refunds of sums paid as VAT: refund accounted for by someone
  other than the trader who made the overpayment: post cessation receipts'
---

## This is direct tax guidance; for indirect tax guidance, refer to VAT Guidance.

A VAT group can claim refunds of sum originally paid as VAT where the trading company has ceased trading and been wound up. See [BIM40171](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim40171) for guidance on VAT groups generally.

If the refund is received simply as a sum due to the trader after the trade has ceased, then it is taxable as a post cessation receipt. The charge on post cessation receipts is not restricted to sums received by the trader and also applies to such receipts received by other people, see [BIM90000](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim90000) onwards.

The refund of a sum, that would not have been taxable on the trader, is not taxable under the post cessation receipts legislation. Such sums include refunds of expenditure originally disallowed as a trading expense for direct tax purposes either because it was a capital payment or it was a payment disallowed by statute (for example, overseas entertaining expenditure).

## Example

A Ltd, B Ltd and C Ltd were car dealerships in the MNO VAT group.

In 2008, the directors of M Plc decided to rationalise their operations, as a result the trade of A Ltd was hived up into M Plc, whilst B Ltd and C Ltd ceased trading. B Ld and C Ltd were subsequently dissolved.

N Ltd, the current representative member, subsequently made claims for refunds of sums wrongly paid as VAT. In doing so N Ltd was acting on behalf of the MNO VAT group as a whole.

HMRC agreed the claim, and the refund was accounted for by N Ltd, acting as representative member for the MNO VAT group.

The receipt in respect of A Ltd was recognised in the accounts of M Plc as the trade of A Ltd had become part of the trade of M Plc.

The directors of M Plc decide to recognise the refunds in respect of B Ltd and C Ltd, which were wound up, in the accounts of M Plc.

The refund in respect of A Ltd is a receipt from the trade carried on by M Plc and is taxable as a trading receipt.

The refunds in respect of B Ltd and C Ltd are post cessation receipts of those companies’ trades. M Plc is taxable on these refunds under the post cessation receipts legislation. M Plc has received the refunds and is entitled to them as a result of the VAT legislation.
