---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim45700
public_updated_at: '2026-07-01T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM45700
title: 'Specific deductions - interest: Withdrawal of capital from a business'
---

This chapter applies for
Income Tax purposes to the computation of trade profits and property income.
References in the text to a ‘business’ should therefore be taken to include
both trades and property businesses. The chapter does not apply for Corporation
Tax purposes, where there are separate rules in the loan relationships
legislation (see [CFM30000](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/corporate-finance-manual/cfm30000)).

S34 Income Tax (Trading and
Other Income) Act 2005

A proprietor of a business may withdraw the
profits of the business and the capital they have introduced to the business, even
though subsequent funding may then have to be provided by
interest bearing loans. 
However, simply exchanging existing capital for loan finance does not on
its own satisfy the wholly and exclusively test provided by S34. The interest
payable on the loans is an allowable deduction where the borrowing is used for
business expenditure or acquisition of assets used in the business.

#### **Example 1**

Mr P wants to substantially increase the stock levels in his business.  He approaches the bank and provides details
of his growing business.  The bank agree
to increase the business overdraft facility by £10,000.  Mr P then uses most of the facility to
purchase more stock, but also uses some of the available overdraft facility to help purchase a new private car.  The identifiable proportion of the interest
relating to the amount used to purchase new stock is an allowable
deduction but the interest relating to the proportion
used to purchase the new car is not an allowable deduction.

#### **Example 2**

Mrs H owns a house in London that she rents out to
students as part of her UK property business. 
She leaves her current employment to take up a new job in Paris.  Mrs H increases her mortgage on the property
she rents out and
uses the additional funds raised to purchase her new private residence in
Paris. 
As the funds are used to buy a new private
asset the interest on the new remortgage is not an allowable deduction in the
property business.  

#### Example 3

Mr X has
taken over the family business which is a small firm manufacturing plastic
dinosaur toys. It does reasonably well making a profit of £45,000 a year. The
factory unit was built 20 years ago at a cost of £150,000 and is owned outright
by Mr X.

Mr X has the property revalued and is able to secure loan funding of
£150,000 against the property. On obtaining the loan finance Mr X uses £75,000
to expand the product lines of the business and £75,000 is immediately withdrawn
to fund a holiday home in Spain.

Although
the bank loan is secured on the factory and is shown as a trading liability in
the accounts, part of the money has been used for a non-business purpose and
therefore it is reasonable to seek further informaiton to understand if an
interest restriction is required.

In assessing what, if any, amount of the loan and the interest thereon
has a non-business purpose consideration would need to be given to the purpose(s) of Mr X at the time he
obtained the funding, as well
as amounts that may have been capable of withdrawal from the business absent
the loan funding. Further advice is provided at [BIM45705](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim45705).
