---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim41125
public_updated_at: '2022-12-07T13:52:59+00:00'
section_id: BIM41125
title: 'Specific receipts: reverse premiums: timing of the receipt - the normal case'
---

A reverse premium received is normally taxed in accordance
with the accountancy treatment.

Having simply prescribed that a reverse premium is a revenue
receipt, the legislation leaves the time when the receipt must be brought into
account in computing trade or property business profits to be governed by
generally accepted accounting practice in the normal case. Unless avoidance is
involved, a reverse premium will usually be brought to account for tax purposes
as it is credited in the accounts. The avoidance case is considered in [BIM41130](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim41130).

Note this does not necessarily mean you are obliged to
accept the spread of the receipt actually adopted in the accounts. The timing
of the receipt for tax purposes must reflect generally accepted accounting
practice.

Reverse premiums should be accounted for in accordance with
FRS 102 Section 20 Leases. FRS 102 requires the receipt to be spread on a
straight line basis over the term of the lease.

Relevant standards under other frameworks are:

FRS 105 Section 15 Leases.

IAS: IFRS 16 Leases (from 1 January 2019); SIC 15 Operating
Leases – Incentives. IFRS 16 requires a lessee to include lease incentives in
the measurement of both the right-of-use asset and the lease liability, which
is spread over the life of the lease using the amortised cost method. SIC 15
required the receipt to be spread on a straight line basis over the term of the
lease and is superseded by IFRS 16.

Old UK GAAP: UITF 28 Operating Lease Incentives . UITF 28
required the receipt to be spread on a straight line basis over either the term
of the lease, or to the date of the first rent review expected to adjust the
rent to prevailing market rate, whichever comes first.

Thus, there will be no need to adjust the commercial profit
shown in the accounts unless either there is reason to believe generally
accepted accounting practice has not been followed, or the anti-avoidance rule
in [BIM41130](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim41130) applies.

For more about the relationship between tax and accountancy
see [BIM31000](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim31000) onwards.

If you have concerns regarding the accounting treatment of
reverse premiums, seek advice from an HMRC Advisory Accountant.
