---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim55134
public_updated_at: '2024-02-28T17:14:47+00:00'
section_id: BIM55134
title: 'Farming: Basic Payment Scheme: Accountancy Treatment'
---

The accountancy
treatment will depend on the standards and accounting policies that are being
applied. Where ‘Old UK GAAP’ is applied then the expected treatment of BP will
be aligned to that presented in the joint ICAEW and ICAS paper published in May
2005 and reproduced with permission as appendix 2 to the Tax Bulletin Special
Edition published in June 2005.

Where FRS 102
is applied the BP will be accounted for as a form of government grant with
income and a related asset recognised at the fair value of the consideration
received when there is reasonable assurance that:

        i) the entity will comply with the condition attaching to them; and  
       ii) the grants will be received.  
  
The timing of
recognition of income may vary depending on whether the performance or accruals
model is applied. 

The PE
entitlement represents an intangible asset and would be initially recognised at
cost.  Where the cost model is applied
the intangible is carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and
impairment losses.

Amortisation
and impairment charges on the intangible asset would be recognised as expenses
in the P&L.

Where the
revaluation model is applied the intangible asset
shall be carried at a revalued amount, being its fair value at the date of
revaluation less any subsequent accumulated amortisation and subsequent
accumulated impairment losses.

Increases in the carrying value of the intangible as a
result of a revaluation are recognised in other comprehensive income except,
the increase is recognised in profit or loss where it reverses a revaluation
decrease of the same assets previously recognised in profit or loss. 

A revaluation decrease is recognised in other
comprehensive income to the extent of any previous revaluation increase in
respect of that asset.  Otherwise, it is
recognised in the profit or loss.
