---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim55138
public_updated_at: '2024-02-28T17:07:08+00:00'
section_id: BIM55138
title: 'Farming: Basic Payment Scheme: Phasing Out of BPS: De-linked Payments'
---

Direct Payments will be delinked from land in
2024. The last delinked Direct Payments will be made in 2027. There would be no
requirement for recipients of delinked Direct Payments to continue to farm,
hold land or hold entitlements. Instead, delinked Direct Payments will be based
on a reference period (see further below).

Delinked Direct Payments will simplify Direct
Payments as they are phased out. Also, as the payments will no longer be based
on land area, they will further facilitate structural change.  
  
Cross Compliance
conditions ended on 31 December 2023, therefore, there is no link between these
rules and the de-linked payments.  
  
To receive delinked
payments, an applicant:  
  
       (i) must have
claimed, and been eligible for, BPS payments in England in the 2023 scheme year  
           (except for some inherited land) **and**  
      (ii) have a
reference amount  
  
Your reference
amount will normally be your average BPS payment in the refernce period, which
is the BPS 2020 to 2022 scheme years.   If you did not
claim BPS in the reference period, you will only have a reference amount if BPS
reference data has been transferred to you.

Following the introduction of delinked Direct
Payments, those who are eligible for them will normally receive payments during
the remainder of the agricultural transition.

If someone qualifies for a delinked Direct
Payment based on the reference period, they will continue to be eligible to
receive the payments throughout the transition, with no annual eligibility
conditions.
