---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim55128
public_updated_at: '2024-02-28T16:51:06+00:00'
section_id: BIM55128
title: 'Farming: Basic Payment Scheme (BP): Tax Treatment/Basic Charge'
---

# 

**The Basic Charge (Income Tax Issues)**  
  
S5, S9, S25 and S687 Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005, S996 Income Tax Act 2007,  
 S35, S36, S46 and S979 Corporation Tax Act 2009, S1125 Corporation Tax Act 2010  
  
All BP receipts
are chargeable to income tax (subject to the usual exemptions, for example, for
charities). The basis of charge will depend on the circumstances under which
they are received. It is worth being aware of these, as the differences in
treatment can be significant.

As BPS PE (BPS payment entitlements) are essential to claim BP and then open the
door to the Greening and Young Farmer payments, these are seen as effectively
one income stream.

## 

**Traditional Farmer**  
The most
straightforward situation is that of ordinary commercial farmers who continue
to farm as they have for many years in that they grow and harvest crops and/or
rear farm animals. Such a person continues to satisfy the statutory definition
of farming for tax purposes and receives the subsidy for farming in accordance
with the BPS rules. As a consequence sums receivable are chargeable as revenue
trade receipts for income tax purposes.

## 

**BP without Production**  
  
Under the BPS it
is possible to receive an income without production if certain conditions are
met. Where there is no actual production then there can be no occupation for
the purposes of husbandry and therefore no farming trade. Whether the farmer
has actually ceased to farm for tax purposes will be a question of fact. One
must look at the intention together with the evidence supporting the stated
intention. There are several main possibilities.

First, where
only part of the holding is no longer used for production then the farm as a
whole will likely continue to be worked and the farming trade continue.
Similarly, where there is no production on the whole of the farm but this is a
temporary measure, for example while changes are being made, then HMRC will
accept that the farming trade continues. However, if a return or claim is made
that production has ceased only temporarily, then HMRC would expect to see the
farm infrastructure maintained.

Second, where
there is a permanent cessation of all production then the trade will also have
ceased. If there is no trade then the BP will be chargeable as miscellaneous
income under Chapter 8 of Part 5 of Income Tax Trading and Other Income Act
2005 (ITTOIA).

Third, there may
be a new trade in place of farming. If there is no farming trade for tax
purposes but it can be shown that the land occupied is still managed on a
commercial basis and with a view to the realisation of profits then that
occupation will still constitute a trade under section 10 ITTOIA 2005. This is
a different trade from farming. So, for example, if unused losses existed at
the change then they would not be available to relieve against profits arising
in the new trade. The onus will very much be on the land occupier to show that
these conditions are satisfied and that trading status is consequently
justified. However, where the person so asserting was previously a profitable
commercial farmer then while the potential profitability of the activity will
still need to be established, HMRC will make the presumption (rebuttable) that
the farm will continue to be organised and run on a commercial basis.

## 

**Non Farmers**  
  
The simple receipt
of BP is not evidence that a person is carrying on a trade of farming for tax purposes.
The difference between the way entitlement to BP is defined and the way farming
is defined for tax purposes needs to be appreciated. For example, land that is
used for grazing horses or ponies kept for the leisure purposes of the BP
recipient is eligible for the BP provided all the other conditions are
satisfied. But that does not mean a trade is being carried on. In these cases
the charge to tax will arise under the miscellaneous income provisions.

In summary, BP
may be taxable under:

           ·        
section 9 ITTOIA
2005 (farming),

           ·        
section 10
ITTOIA 2005 (non-farming trade), or

           ·        
Chapter 8 of
Part 5 of ITTOIA 2005 as miscellaneous income.
