---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim64305
public_updated_at: '2023-03-21T09:14:12+00:00'
section_id: BIM64305
title: 'Private Finance Initiative (PFI): Interest: non-trade: example 1'
---

A private sector operator enters into a PFI contract with a public sector purchaser to lease a fully equipped hospital extension to the purchaser for 25 years. In addition, the operator is to provide non-clinical support services for the existing hospital, and the extension, for the duration of the contract. The support trade commences immediately (see [BIM64065](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim64065)). The operator builds the extension on land it acquires for the purpose, the construction costs being financed by a bank loan. In return, the operator receives an annual service payment, the unitary charge.

## Accounting period 1

Construction of the hospital extension is completed during the accounting period.

For tax purposes the design and construction costs of the extension are capital expenditure. The hospital extension is a fixed capital asset of the operator’s property business (see [BIM64035](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim64035) onwards). For accounting purposes the example assumes that the extension is reported as a finance debtor on the operator’s balance sheet, under FRS5 Application Note F (see [BIM64070](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim64070) onwards). The construction costs are shown as debited direct to the finance debtor on the balance sheet during the construction period, at a figure of £75m representing cost. Interest on the construction loan, of £5m, is debited to the profit and loss account.

| - | - | Amount | - | - | Amount |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dr | Finance debtor | £75m | Cr | Bank | £75m |
| Dr | P&L account (interest) | £5m | Cr | Bank | £5m |

A unitary payment of £15m is receivable in the first accounting period. The example assumes that £2m of the payment is for the provision of the hospital (property business) and £13m for the provision of support services (trading).

For accounting purposes £12m is credited to the profit and loss account (being notional interest on the finance debtor and operating income) and £3m is credited to the finance debtor.

| - | - | Amount | - | - | Amount |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dr | Bank | £15m | Cr | P&L account | £12m |
| - | - | - | Cr | Finance debtor | £3m |

For tax purposes we follow the accounting recognition of income in the profit and loss account, subject to any over-riding statutory or case law principle.

The £3m credited to the finance debtor is business income and is included as an addition in the trading income and property income computations (see [BIM64125](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim64125)).

The proportion of the finance debtor, against which the £3m credit is matched, represents capital construction costs. No adjustment is required in the tax computations.

The interest debited to the profit and loss account is a non-trading debit, since the loan is for the construction of a property for a property business, and is added back in the tax computations. If there are no other non-trading credits or debits of the period arising from the company’s loan relationships, this creates a non-trading deficit which can, for example, be set off against any profits of the company for the accounting period.

| Tax computation | - | Trading Income | Property Income | Non-trade deficit |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Income (net of interest) | £ 7m | - | - | - |
| Plus part payment | £ 3m | - | - | - |
| Non-trade interest | £ 5m | - | - | - |
| Profit (before overheads) | £15m | £13m | £2m | (£5m) |
