---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim60580
public_updated_at: '2017-07-12T22:48:52+01:00'
section_id: BIM60580
title: Disposals of property deriving its value from land
---

Section 356OD CTA 2010 and Section 517D ITA 2007 set out the conditions
which, if met, mean profits on the disposal of property which derives its value
from land should be treated as trading profits. Section 356OD CTA 2010 and
Section 517D ITA 2007 differ from condition B which applies where it is the
land which is disposed of not the property which derives its value from the
land.

All of the following conditions must be met for Section 356OD CTA 2010
and Section 517D ITA 2007 to apply:

* A
  person realises a profit or gain from a disposal of any property which (at
  the time of the disposal) derives at least 50% of its value from land in
  the United Kingdom, and

 

* The
  person is a party to, or concerned in, an arrangement concerning some or
  all of the project land, and

 

* The
  main purpose or one of the main purposes of the arrangement, is to deal in
  or develop the project land and realise a profit or gain from a disposal
  of property deriving the whole or part of its value from that land.

 

Property deriving its value from land is widely defined and is set out
at Section 356OR CTA 2010 and Section 517S ITA 2007. 

Where a company or individual is within the charge of Section 356OD CTA
2010 or Section 517D ITA 2007, they should notify chargeability within 3 months
from the date of disposal of the property deriving its value from land (for
example, the shares).

 

Company X owns 100% of Company Y. Company Y purchases a piece of UK land
and carries out the development of a block of flats. Company Y has no other
substantial assets so over 50% of the company’s value relates to the land. The
intention of Company X is for Company Y to develop the land and to immediately
dispose of their shares in Company Y when the land is developed. The land is not held as trading stock by Company Y. When
the development is completed Company X sells the shares in Company Y to a third
party.

In this example the disposal meets the conditions and is a disposal of
property deriving its value from land.  The profits should be treated as
trading profits of Company X. 

 

 

Company X purchases 100% of the share capital of Company Y, whose only
asset is a dated office block that is held on investment account. Company X
purchased the shares in company Y to hold as an investment and yield income.

After a period of rental there is a change of intention and a decision
to redevelop and sell the office block.  To carry out this disposal it is
agreed Company X will dispose of its shares in company Y when the redevelopment
is complete.

In this example there has been a change of intention and Section 356OL
CTA 2010 will apply. Only the profit relating to the period after the change of
intention should be taxed as a trading profit. The portion relating to the
period where there was an investment intention should not be included in the
tax calculation. 

Please see BIM60825 for details on apportionment.
