---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim60515
public_updated_at: '2026-04-28T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM60515
title: 'Transactions in land: Overview'
---

This guidance covers:

* Amendments
  to Section 5 CTA 2009, and the introduction of new Sections 5A and 5B;
* Amendments
  to Section 6 ITTOIA 2005, and the introduction of new Sections 6A and 6B;
* Repeal
  of Part 18 CTA 2010 and insertion of Part 8ZB CTA 2010: “Transactions in
  UK land”;
* Repeal
  of Chapter 3 Part 13 ITA 2007 and insertion of Part 9A ITA 2007:
  “Transactions in UK land”;
* Commencement
  and transitional provisions (Sections 80 and 81 FA 2016);
* Notification,
  assessment and payment.

 

The amendments to Section 5 CTA 2009 and Section 6 ITTOIA 2005 extend
the scope of UK taxation to profits from a trade of dealing in or developing UK
land, regardless of the residence of the person making the disposal.

The transactions in land legislation is repealed and replaced by new
legislation with additional provisions, including specific rules with regard to
fragmentation, enveloping and anti-avoidance.

One aspect of the commencement and transitional provisions is to prevent
tax avoidance between Budget Day (16 March 2016), when the changes were
announced, and the introduction of the legislation.

The legislation applies from 5 July 2016 and the anti-forestalling rules
apply to transactions on or after 16 March 2016.

**Background**

In the 2016 Budget, the Government announced changes designed to counter
the use of offshore structures, in order to disguise what is in essence a trade
in land or a trade in developing land, and ensure the taxation of onshore and
offshore property developers was put on a level playing field. These rules do
not alter the treatment of or recharacterise investment activities, except
where they are part of such a wider trading activity. The legislation was
introduced in the Finance Act 2016, and applies in relation to disposals on or after 5 July 2016.

**Who is affected?**

The rules apply to resident and non-resident companies and individuals
carrying on a trade of dealing in or developing UK land either directly or
indirectly through, for example, holding an interest in a partnership that
carries on a trade of dealing in or developing UK land.  Where the income
or profits are already fully chargeable to tax as income in the UK there will
be no double charge. This means there will be no impact on UK businesses if
profits are already fully taxed as income in the UK.

**Process and procedure**

Profits from disposals are to be treated as trading profits. The profits
should be calculated under normal computational rules under Part 3 CTA 2009 or
Part 2 ITTOIA 2005. See [here](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim60620).

Both UK resident and non-UK resident companies and individuals will need
to notify  chargeability and register to
pay tax no later than 3 months after coming within the
charge to tax.

For the purposes of the Transactions in UK Land
rules, non-UK residents and UK residents come within the charge to tax on making
a disposal of UK land or property on or after 5 July 2016.

No challenge on the basis of this legislation should be made unless
approval has been sought from Business Assets & International.  Where
a challenge is being considered, a submission should be made to Paul
Boyle.

 

**Diverted Profits Tax (DPT) notification
requirements**

DPT applies to accounting periods begining between 1 April 2015 and 31 December 2025. Companies must notify HMRC if they are potentially within the scope of
DPT. The DPT guidance provides details on when a notification is required at
[INTM489886](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/international-manual/intm489886).

The guidance explains a company must notify where it is potentially
within the scope of DPT.  Where UK tax is paid on all profits from dealing
in or developing UK land it would be unlikely for any of the notification
conditions to be met.

The Unassessed Transfer Pricing Profits (UTPP) rules apply to accounting periods begining on or after 1 January 2026. Companies within scope of the UTPP rules are not required to notify HMRC. 

Introduction to manual: abbreviations used

 

**PE – Permanent Establishment**

**CTA – Corporation Tax Act**

**ITA – Income Tax Act**

**ITTOIA – Income Tax (Trading and Other
Income) Act**

**TIOPA - Taxation (International and
Other Provisions) Act**

 

Introduction to manual: contact point

 

If you have any comments on this guidance, or suggestions for
improvement, please send them to:

 

Paul Boyle (HMRC Strategy and Policy, Business, Assets & International)

[paul.boyle@hmrc.gov.uk](mailto:paul.boyle@hmrc.gov.uk)

[INTM489886](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/international-manual/intm489886)
