---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim60045
public_updated_at: '2016-04-01T15:37:04+01:00'
section_id: BIM60045
title: 'Measuring the profits (particular trades): land: trading transactions: equivocal
  and unequivocal transactions'
---

There may be cases where, on examination of all the facts, it is difficult to decide whether the transaction is part of a trade. A distinction between these 'equivocal' transactions and the 'unequivocal' variety is drawn in the past cases. Examples are **Iswera v CIR** [1965], 1WLR668, a Ceylonese Privy Council Case, copies of which are available from Business Profits, and **Kirkham v Williams** [1991] 64TC253.

There are no hard and fast rules as to what makes a transaction equivocal. The matter was considered in **Kirkham v Williams**. In that case Nourse LJ thought an equivocal or ambiguous case was one in which the facts, when viewed on their own, did not tell you whether the land was acquired as trading stock or as a capital asset.

In 'unequivocal' or unambiguous cases the purchaser’s actual intention will not be conclusive (see **Iswera v CIR**). Where the transaction is equivocal the purchaser’s motive(s) for entering into a transaction may determine the character of the whole transaction.

A purchaser’s stated intention of a single capital transaction will constitute evidence that the Tribunal must accept unless sufficient evidence of a trading intention can be adduced by reference to the badges of trade.

This is the principle to be drawn from **Iswera** which was cited with approval in **Kirkham**.

As a general rule we should, when the facts allow, argue that the transaction was unequivocal. This means, identifying as many badges of trading as possible.
