---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim72020
public_updated_at: '2025-04-07T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM72020
title: 'Cash Basis: receipts: capital receipts under or after leaving the cash basis'
---

S96A ITTOIA 2005, S96B ITTOIA 2005, S105 (2A) ITTOIA 2005

Ordinarily, capital receipts are not taxable in calculating
the profits of a trade (see [BIM35001](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim35001) onwards
for further information on the capital / revenue divide). However, for a
business using the cash basis or which has previously used the cash basis,
special rules mean that certain capital receipts are included in the
calculation of trading income for the tax year.

Amounts to be included as cash basis receipts of the trade
are different depending on whether they are received whilst the business is
using the cash basis
or after they have left the cash basis:

* Receipts from the disposal or deemed disposal of
  items of a capital nature under the cash basis.
* Any proceeds or capital refunds received in
  respect of an asset whilst the business is using the cash basis should be
  brought into account as a receipt of the trade where the whole or part of any
  expenditure paid to acquire, create or improve the asset has been:

1. brought into account in calculating the profits
   of a trade under the cash basis, or
2. is cash basis deductible (see BIM72035) but was
   incurred (or treated as incurred) before the tax year in which the cash basis
   was entered into and was brought into account in a year for which the cash
   basis  did not apply; this includes.

* a capital allowance made
  under Parts 2, 5, 6, 7 or 8 of CAA2001 or where qualifying expenditure
  (within the meaning of Parts 2, 7 or 8 of CAA 2001) is allocated to a pool
  for the trade and is set-off against different disposal receipts.

* Receipts from the disposal or deemed disposal of
  items of a capital nature after leaving the cash basis.
* Any proceeds in respect of an asset where the
  expenditure would be qualifying expenditure under Parts 2, 5, 6, 7 or 8 of CAA
  2001 should be brought into account as disposal proceeds under these parts of
  CAA 2001 rather than as a receipt of the trade.
* Any other proceeds or capital refunds received
  in respect of an asset where the whole or part of any expenditure paid to
  acquire, create or improve that asset was brought into account in calculating
  the profits of the trade whilst the business was using the cash basis, or, in a
  year before the business last used the cash basis and for which the cash basis
  did not apply, should be brought into account as a receipt of the trade.

In all cases proceeds include

* any
  proceeds arising from the disposal of the asset or any part of it.
* any
  proceeds arising from the grant of any right in respect of, or any
  interest in, the asset.
* any
  amount of damages, proceeds of insurance or other compensation received in
  respect of the asset.

Any of the above receipts should be proportionately reduced
if only part of the expenditure was or would have been brought into account in
calculating the profits of the trade under the cash basis.

In addition, a person must bring into account a cash basis
receipt equal to

* The
  market value of the asset when the person ceases to use it for the
  purposes of the trade.
* The
  relevant proportion of the market value of the asset if at any time there
  is a material increase in the person’s non-business use of the asset (see
  example below) - S96A(5) - (6) ITTOIA 2005

**Example**

Hugo buys a van for use in his trade on 6 April 2024. The
van costs £5,000, which he pays in cash, and the business use proportion is
90%.

When calculating his profit for the tax year ending on 5
April 2025 - his cash basis expenses will include £4,500 (£5,000 x 90%) for the
purchase of the van.

Hugo’s wife starts using the van for weekly supermarket
trips from 6 April 2025. Hugo works out that the business use proportion has
decreased to 70%. At that time, the market value of the van is £4,000. The
amount to be taken into account as a cash basis receipt for the year to 5 April
2026 is the ‘relevant proportion’ of the market value of the van at the time
the business use decreased.

The relevant proportion is the difference between the
private use before and after the increase, so 30% less 10%.

The cash basis receipt is £800 - 20% of £4000.

There is no corresponding cash basis expense if the level of
business use subsequently increases.

**Industrial development grants**

Where a person carrying on a trade receives a grant under:

* S7
  or S8 of the Industrial Development Act 1982, or
* Article
  7, 9 or 30 of the Industrial Development (Northern Ireland) Order 1982,

the payment must be brought into account as a receipt in
calculating the taxable profits of the trade.

For a person to whom cash basis applies,
this is the case even if the grant is designated as made towards the cost of
specified capital expenditure.
