---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim72067
public_updated_at: '2025-04-09T11:28:01+01:00'
section_id: BIM72067
title: 'Cash basis transitional adjustments: entering the cash basis: capital allowances'
---

**Capital allowances: unrelieved balances**

In the cash basis, a business deducts amounts paid for
equipment (but not payments for a car or other specifically excluded
expenditure see [BIM72035](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim72035))
in arriving at its cash basis profit figure.

If, prior to its first cash basis period, a business had
been claiming capital allowances (under sections 59(1), 59(2), 461 or 475 of
CAA2001), and there are unrelieved balances relating to the trade available on
which capital allowances could still be claimed and which would be deductible
under the cash basis, a transitional adjustment has to be made to ensure the
correct amount of tax relief.

Any remaining unrelieved expenditure on assets that are in
any capital allowances pool at the end of the period before the business starts
using the cash basis (apart from that on non-cash deductible expenditure)
becomes a deduction in the first year of the cash basis and the pool is reduced
to zero.

An existing car pool remains and continues to operate.

For mineral extraction trades, a deduction is allowed
providing that the expenditure is cash basis deductible and there would have
been qualifying unrelieved balances if not for Sections 419A(1) of CAA2001.

The examples below explain how this works in practice.

**Example 1**

A business purchased equipment some years ago. It had been
paid for in full and the expenditure had been pooled in the main capital
allowances pool. Allowances had been claimed on the balance in the pool. At the
end of the final period before the cash basis started the balance in the pool
that would have been carried to the start of the new period was £1,545. In the
cash basis period, new equipment costing £1,250 has been purchased.

A transitional adjustment is required to ensure the business
gets tax relief for the £1,545 that has been spent on equipment in previous
periods (this amount has not been relieved for tax because the capital
allowances had not yet been claimed). So

|  | **Amount** |
| --- | --- |
| Amount paid for new equipment in the cash basis period | £1,250 deduction |
| Transitional adjustment: | - |
| Capital allowances not yet claimed | £ 1,545 deduction |

Both these amounts are treated as allowable expenses in
calculating trade profits using the cash basis.

**Non-cash deductible expenditure**

If either the main pool or the special rate pool includes
expenditure which is non-cash basis deductible in the amount of the unrelieved
expenditure, the full amount of unrelieved expenditure cannot be a deduction in
the first year of the cash basis. The amount that can be deducted is found by
reducing the amount in a just and reasonable way.

**Example 2**

The business bought two main rate cars some years ago. They
were used only for business purposes, so the expenditure was pooled in the main
pool and writing down allowances were claimed. The business bought other
equipment in a later year and did not claim Annual Investment Allowance (AIA)
in that year, so the expenditure was added to the balance of expenditure in the
main pool and writing down allowances were claimed. At the end of the last
period before the business starts to use cash basis the balance of unrelieved
expenditure in the main pool was £15,000. Some of that is the balance of the
expenditure on the cars and some is the balance of expenditure on the other
equipment.

The balance of expenditure on the equipment can be deducted
in the first period of the cash basis. The balance of expenditure on the cars
cannot be deducted in the cash basis.

The amount of the £15,000 that can be deducted is determined
on a just and reasonable basis.

The amount of the £15,000 that is the balance of the
expenditure on the cars is left in the pool (which is separate to any pool for
a car with private use) and the business will continue to claim allowances on
the balance each year.

**Capital allowances: assets not fully paid for**

If a business has been buying equipment by paying for it in
instalments, which are cash-basis deductible and for which they have claimed
capital allowances (under Parts 2,5,6,7 or 8 of CAA2001) and there are
instalments still to be paid when the first cash basis period begins, this also
will need to be considered when looking at the transitional adjustments. The
principle of the cash basis is that tax relief is not given until a payment is
made.

**Example 3**

The business has been buying a computer on hire purchase
paying monthly (£250 per month) instalments, to be spread over 24 months. Its
total cost is £6,000, and that entire cost was treated as having been paid on
the day the business started to use the computer in the business. The business
claimed the full amount of £6,000 as an Annual Investment Allowance (AIA) in
the last tax year. At the end of the last tax year, there were 21 instalments
of £250 left to pay.

In the cash basis period, the instalments will be deducted
when paid. But the full £6,000 cost has already been relieved for tax. A
transitional adjustment is needed so that the business does not get more tax
relief than it is entitled to. The transitional adjustment treats the amount of
the unpaid instalments when the cash basis period started as a receipt in the
first period of the cash basis. There were 21 instalments of £250 not yet paid,
so the cash basis receipt is £5,250 (21 x £250).

The business can claim a deduction for each instalment as it
is paid. There will be 12 instalments paid in the first cash basis period,
giving a deduction of £3,000 (12 x £250). In addition, the business pays £700
for new equipment in the cash basis period (giving a total spend of £700 +
£3000 = £3,700). So

|  | **Amount** | **Amount** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Amount paid for equipment in the cash basis period | (£700 + £3000) | £3,700 deduction |
| Transitional adjustment: | - | - |
| Instalments not yet paid by the end  of the last tax year | (£5,250) receipt | - |

If the computer is used partly for business and partly for
other purposes the amounts claimed as deductions and receipts are to be
adjusted on a just and reasonable basis so that only the part of the
expenditure for business use is claimed as a deduction.

At the end of the first cash basis period, the business has
9 more instalments to pay, which will be paid in the second cash basis period.
So the business will deduct those payments (9 x £250 = £2,250) in the second
cash basis period.

Note that the instalments in this example relate to the
capital cost of the computer only. The business proportion of the interest
element of any instalments will be allowable in full (see [BIM70040](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim70040).

**Example 4**

In the period of account before the cash basis the business
purchased new office furniture costing £ 5,000. The furniture was delivered at
the end of the period of account but the business did not have to pay for it
for 60 days. The business claimed the full £5,000 as AIA in the final period
before the cash basis. The £5,000 payment was made in the cash basis period.
Additionally, the business paid £4,000 for new equipment in the first period of
the cash basis, so payments totalling £9,000 were made in the cash basis
period.

At the end of the last period before the cash basis, the
amount the business has paid for the furniture (nil) was less than the
allowances given (£5,000).

The difference between the amount paid and the allowance
given is treated as a receipt in the first period of the cash basis - here, the
difference is £5,000.

The business can claim a deduction for the £5,000 payment
when it is made. So

Payments for equipment

|  | **Amount** | **Amount** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| in the cash basis period | (£5,000 + £4,000) | £9,000 deduction |
| Transitional adjustment: | - | - |

|  | **Amount** |
| --- | --- |
| Difference between amount paid for furniture   and allowances given | (£5,000) receipt |
