---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim72070
public_updated_at: '2025-04-07T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM72070
title: 'Cash basis: transitional adjustments: leaving the cash basis: overview'
---

**BIM72070 - Cash basis: transitional adjustments: leaving
the cash basis: overview**

Chapter 17 of Part 2 ITTOIA 2005

The transitional tax adjustments described in this section
are all concerned with ensuring that business income is taxed once and only
once, and business expense is relieved once and only once.  When a business opts to calculate its profits
in accordance with generally accepted accounting practice (GAAP) instead of
using cash basis, correctly prepared accruals basis profit and loss accounts
should include only income earned from work done in the tax year.

This means that any money received from customers in this
new tax year for work done in the previous (cash basis) tax year, would not be
included in the accruals basis accounts income figure. Because the money was
not received in the cash basis tax year, it will not have been taxed.

So unless adjustments are made as described below, income
would not be taxed correctly. Similar considerations apply to expenses (in
respect of the period in which a business gets tax deductions).

The adjustments have to be calculated in a specified way, in
accordance with the legislation, to give an overall positive or negative
adjustment. The way the adjustment is treated for tax depends on whether it is
positive or negative. The method of calculating the adjustment, and the tax
treatment, are described at BIM72071.

If any prepayments were made while in the cash basis (that
is, up front payments for goods or services that would be supplied in periods
after leaving the cash basis - so there was a tax deduction for the full amount
paid, in the cash basis), no adjustment has to be made in the first tax period
after the business leaves the cash basis. However, any subsequent expense in
the accruals accounts that relate to the prepayment must be disallowed for tax.
This is explained at BIM72072.

There are specific considerations for equipment. In the cash
basis, a business deducts the amounts paid for equipment. When not in the cash
basis, the amounts paid for equipment are not deducted in calculating accruals
basis profits. Instead, capital allowances are claimed on the cost of the
equipment.
