---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim72072
public_updated_at: '2025-04-07T09:53:15+01:00'
section_id: BIM72072
title: 'Cash basis: transitional adjustments: leaving the cash basis: prepayments'
---

If a business
were to pay its business rates (for example) for the whole year up front, some
of that payment could be a prepayment.

**Example**

12 months
business rates of £1,200 is paid in March 2025, for the rates year commencing 1
April 2025, while in the cash basis. So 360 days’ worth of rates (£1,183) has
been prepaid (covering period 6 April 2025 to 31 March 2026).

The business
gets a tax deduction for the full £1,200 paid in the tax year ending 5 April
2025 under cash basis rules.

The business subsequently
elects to prepare accruals based accounts for the tax year commencing 6 April
2025. For those accruals based accounts to be correctly prepared, they would
have to include an expense for the business rates that related to the period (6
April to 5 April 2026) so would include an expense for the £1,183 ( prepaid rates
for the period 6 April 2025 to 31 March 2026) above. The profit figure from
those accounts would be the starting point for the taxable profits.

It looks like
the business would get a deduction twice for £1,183 of the rates that had been
prepaid: once in the cash basis period, and again in the first accruals
accounts period.

To prevent
this, the legislation requires that the expense that is brought into the
accruals based accounts that relates to an amount prepaid while in the cash
basis is disallowed for tax.

So in this
example, the £1,183 (the amount of the prepayment made in the last cash basis
period) would be disallowed when calculating the taxable profits for the tax
year ending 5 April 2026.
