---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/business-income-manual/bim72073
public_updated_at: '2025-04-07T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: BIM72073
title: 'Cash basis: transitional adjustments: leaving the cash basis: capital expenditure'
---

S66A CAA 2001

In the cash
basis, amounts paid for items of equipment (other than those specifically
excluded, see BIM72035) would be deducted in arriving at a cash basis profit
figure, just the same as any other trading expense paid by the business.

For businesses
not in the cash basis, the cost of equipment is deducted for tax in a different
way to other trading expenses. For qualifying items, capital allowances are
claimed instead of deducting the total cost of the item.

In the first
period after leaving the cash basis, some adjustments are required to make sure
that future transactions involving the equipment are taxed correctly.

**Qualifying
Expenditure**

Amounts paid
for equipment (still in use by the business when leaving the cash basis and
which were cash basis deductible in the periods that the business was in the
cash basis, must be brought into a capital allowance pool. The amount of those
payments that had already been relieved for tax must be deducted in the pool.
In many cases, this should result in a net nil balance on the capital
allowances pool.

Bringing the
items into a capital allowances pool has the effect that any future disposal
proceeds from selling such equipment will have to be brought into the pool.

**Non
Qualifying Expenditure**

Where an
expense has been brought into account under the cash basis which, if not for
the operation of the cash basis, would not have been qualifying expenditure,
the amount paid should not be brought into the capital allowance pool. Instead,
any proceeds from the sale of the assets should be brought into account as a
receipt in calculating the profits of the trade in the account period in which
the sale took place.

**Example 1**

While in the
cash basis a business purchased tools and equipment and paid £5,000 for them.
They claimed the full amount as a deduction.

They should
first allocate the full amount of the cost to the main pool and then deduct the
full amount of expenditure that has been claimed as a deduction. In many cases
this will leave a balance of nil for the tools and equipment in the main pool.

|  | **Main pool** |
| --- | --- |
| Add | £5,000 |
| Deduct | £5,000 |
| Balance to be brought into the pool | NIL |

**Example 2**

While in the
cash basis a business bought some equipment for £2,000. They paid £1,000 on
delivery and agreed to pay two further instalments of £500. When they left the
cash basis they had one payment of £500 to make.

They should
allocate the full amount of the cost to the main pool and deduct the amount
they have already claimed.

|  | **Main Pool** |
| --- | --- |
| Add | £2,000 |
| Deduct | £1,500 |
| Balance to be brought into the pool | £ 500 |

**Example 3**

There are
special capital allowances rules for items purchased under a HP contract.

While in the
cash basis, the business has been buying a computer (total cost £6,000 not
including interest) on Hire Purchase paying monthly (£550 per month, £500
towards the cost and £50 interest) instalments. As at the end of the last cash
basis period, £4,400 of instalments had been paid and had been deducted for
tax. This is made up of 8 payments of £550 (£4,000 towards the cost and £400
interest).

If the business
had not been in the cash basis, the entire £6,000 cost would have been treated
as having been paid on the day the business started to use the computer in the
business so that capital allowances could have been claimed on the £6,000 from
such date.

The
transitional adjustment required in the first period after leaving the cash
basis is to bring in the full £6,000 cost into the capital allowances pool, and
deduct from the pool balance the amount of expenditure on the computer but not
the interest relieved, which is £4,000 in this example.

This would give
a balance on the pool of £2,000.

|  | **Main Pool** |
| --- | --- |
| Add | £6,000 |
| Deduct | £4,000 |
| Balance to be brought into the pool | £2,000 |
