---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam106120
public_updated_at: '2026-07-10T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: SAM106120
title: 'Records: bankruptcy: voluntary arrangements'
---

Voluntary Arrangements Service (VAS) at Enforcement and Insolvency Service (Worthing) will deal with notifications that either an application for an interim order has been made, or that a creditors meeting has been arranged. Any necessary advice will be given to the Debt Management office, as will a copy of the approved proposals.

Voluntary arrangements are not available under Scottish law. See **Arrangements in Scotland- Protected Trust Deeds** below

The procedural principles of voluntary arrangement cases are the same as for bankruptcy cases. For example

* Notifications received direct in the office with responsibility for Processing work or Debt Management office are to be referred to the Enforcement & Insolvency Service (EIS).
* The taxpayer / debtor may continue to receive income and / or gains that are liable to Self Assessment after the date of the interim order. Separate records are required to deal with liability to the date of the interim order, and subsequent to the date of the interim order

There are five differences

* 1)  If an office with responsibility for Processing work (or Debt Management office) in England, Wales or Scotland learns of the interim order from a source other than from EIS.
* 2)  In Voluntary arrangements it is considered **essential** that the debtor
  + Files any outstanding returns at the date of filing the proposals
  + Complies with all future obligations for filing returns and making payments of liability outside the Voluntary Arrangement by the statutory dates
* 3)  Where the Supervisor disposes of an asset and agrees to meet all or part of any resultant Capital Gain, the tax due on the Capital Gain nevertheless remains chargeable on (and payable by) the debtor. The debtor’s SA return for the relevant year should therefore include the Capital Gain
* 4)  In Voluntary Arrangement (VA) cases statements should continue to be issued to the taxpayer not the supervisor of the VA. You should ensure you do not set up Supervisor in capacity for VA cases
* 5)  In voluntary arrangement cases, the individual retains control of their business and we should continue to communicate directly with the customer, or their agent (if applicable). Any agents details held on the record should not be removed (as is done with bankruptcy cases) unless you receive information that the agent is no longer acting

**Note:** SA processing teams should not set up any Post VA records. These
records will be set up by East Kilbride PT Ops Bankruptcy Team. If the
information recorded on SA Notes by East Kilbride PT Ops Bankruptcy Team or VAS
is insufficient to enable you to resolve a post VA issue, contact the
respective team via the following mailbox.

#### VAS

VAS, id
(DM)

#### East Kilbride PT Ops Bankruptcy Team

DL-EK-Bankruptcy
Queries

**Note:**

**Tax overpaid to the date of the IVA**

Where a customer has an old SA record where, for example,
cancelled penalties have created a credit on SA, the caseworker should refer
the query to the PT Ops Bankruptcy team. They will liaise with EIS and, based
on the outcome, arrange for any repayment to be made either to the supervisor
or the debtor. In line with current guidance, a new UTR should also be
established for the post-IVA period. As the credit is historic, it is likely to
be offered to EIS for offset against any outstanding debts. Where no further
debts exist on HMRC systems, the credit would instead be offered to the
supervisor.

## Failed Voluntary Arrangements

If a customer enters into a VA which fails, and the customer is made bankrupt within the **same** year, the VA record should be changed to show the BY details, and the VA details removed. The post VA record should then be updated to show that it is now the post BY record.

However, if the customer enters into a VA which fails and the customer is made bankrupt in a **later** year, the VA record remains unchanged. The post VA record should be changed to show the BY details, and a new post BY record created (if applicable).

## **Arrangements in Scotland - Protected Trust Deeds**

As stated above, voluntary arrangements are not available
under Scottish law.

In relation to insolvency terminating any agency contract,
the law of agency in Scotland has the same effect as the law in England and
Wales, i.e. the transfer of assets from an individual to their trustee, in a
bankruptcy, causes the agency to terminate. A condition of a Protected Trust
Deed (PTD) (section 167(1) Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 2016) is that all the
debtor's estate is conveyed to the trustee."

For Protected Trust Deeds, tax is payable on asset disposals
by the trustee instead of the debtor.

Further information regarding Protected Trust Deeds can be
found from the Scottish Insolvency Service at [Notes
for Guidance - Protected Trust Deeds - Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 2016](https://aib.gov.uk/publications/notes-for-guidance-protected-trust-deeds-bankruptcy-scotland-act-2016/notes-for-guidance-of-trustees-under-protected-trust-deeds/notes-for-guidance-of-trustees-under-protected-trust-deeds#publication-content)
