---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam113060
public_updated_at: '2016-02-23T14:55:28+00:00'
section_id: SAM113060
title: 'Repayments: repayment work lists: w043 repayments for quality checks work
  list'
---

A proportion of repayments created automatically from the processing of a return on LDC will be selected prior to issue for detailed QA / QC quality checks and work items will be created on the ‘Repayments for Quality Checks’ work list.

The selection will not include repayments created from returns filed electronically or repayments created using the function ISSUE REPAYMENT FROM OVERPAID BALANCE.

Any repayment that is selected will be notified to the office responsible for the processing activities by Work Management and will be subject to QA / QC quality checks by an officer with the user role of Clerical Processing Manager (CLPM).

All repayments selected must be quality checked.

If the repayment is cancelled on the SA record or released as satisfactory from the work list, the work item will be deleted automatically. Clerical deletion is not available on this work list.

For the purpose of reviewing entries on this work list you should follow the QA / QC:SA Return Repayment Validation Check List which can be found on the QA / QC website.

In view of the nature of this work list it is for immediate action and should be reviewed daily.

The results of the checks should be recorded on the Quality (QA/QC) database, (the results are no longer required to be entered on the EDC system (Enterprise Data Capture System)). Further guidance on the input of this information can be found on the QA / QC website.
