---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam125111
public_updated_at: '2022-10-03T09:13:51+01:00'
section_id: SAM125111
title: 'Returns: returns work lists: w035 manual issue of review form 575 (Action
  Guide)'
---

Where you are reviewing an entry on the ‘Manual Issue of Review Form 575’ Work List, follow steps 1 - 14 below. This guide is presented as follows

[Live primary source PAYE record held](#IDAHVOFC) - Steps 1 - 9  
[Other situations](#IDAO1OFC) - Steps 10 - 14

## Live primary source PAYE record held

1. Use PAYE Service Targeted Review Forms to check whether the ‘575 to Husband’ tick box is set to ‘Y’

#### If the ‘575 to Husband’ is set to ‘Y’

2. The Review form 575 will be issued automatically from PAYE to the husband

3. Use function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE to delete the work item

#### If the ‘575 to husband’ is not set

4. In a husband and wife case, enter ‘Y’ in the ‘575 to husband’ field on the PAYE record. The Review form 575 will be issued automatically from PAYE in future years. Note: In a civil partnership case, do not enter the ‘575 to Husband’ signal

5. Prepare a Review form 575 for issue to the husband / PAYE source civil partner

6. Address the form to the husband / PAYE source civil partner, and include the wife’s / SA source civil partner’s UTR (Unique Taxpayer Reference)

7. Make a note of the date of issue in the wife’s / SA source civil partner’s SA Notes

8. Use function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE to delete the work item

9. If you have prepared the form 575 for annual bulk issue, hold it with other forms 575 to be issued manually

## Other situations

10. Prepare a Review form 575 for issue to the husband / PAYE source civil partner

11. Address the form to the husband / PAYE source civil partner, and include the wife’s / SA source civil partner’s UTR

12. Make a note of the date of issue in the wife’s / SA source civil partner’s SA Notes

13. Use function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE to delete the work item

14. If you have prepared the form 575 for annual bulk issue, hold it with other forms 575 to be issued manually
