---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam103071
public_updated_at: '2022-07-28T10:01:56+01:00'
section_id: SAM103071
title: 'Records: movement of taxpayer records: w013 potential transfer cases (Action
  Guide)'
---

Note: From October 2010, entries for processing and compliance have been removed, leaving collection entries only.

When reviewing your ‘Potential Transfer’ work list, follow steps 1 - 2, and then one of steps 3 - 4, or steps 5 - 7, or step 8 below. The guide is presented as follows

[Initial action](#IDAAZ1WC) - Steps 1 - 2  
[To transfer responsibility now](#IDAZ11WC) - Steps 3 - 4  
[To defer transfer of responsibility](#IDAEA2WC) - Steps 5 - 7  
[To delete work item](#IDA4E2WC) - Step 8

For details of how to access any of the SA functions, select ‘Index Of Functions’ on the left of the screen.

## Initial action

1. In function WORK LIST CASES

* Select the entry that you want to work
* Select the [View] button. You will be taken to function SELECTED CASE, to see all available details on the work item. This includes the target office for transfer
* Make a note of the target office details

2. Decide whether or not you want to transfer your responsibility as suggested by the SA system

## To transfer responsibility now

If you want to transfer your responsibility for the SA record now

3. In function WORK LIST CASES

* Select the [OK] button. You will be taken to function MAINTAIN RESPONSIBLE OFFICE

4. In function MAINTAIN RESPONSIBLE OFFICE

* Select the [Transfer] button. You will be taken to screen CHANGE RESPONSIBLE OFFICE
* Enter the new office details in the Organisation Unit ID field
* Select the [OK] button

When responsibility is transferred, all current work items for that type of Revenue activity will be transferred to the new office automatically

## To defer transfer of responsibility

If you want to defer transfer of your responsibility for the SA record

5. In function WORK LIST CASES

* Select the [BF] button. You will be taken to function SET B/F DATE

6. In function SET B/F DATE

* Enter a realistic b/f date
* Enter a b/f note, ensuring that
* Your initials form the first part of the note
* The new office Organisation Unit ID is included

7. Continue to actively work the case so that the required transfer may be made as soon as possible, by following steps 3 - 4 above

## To delete work item

If you decide that transfer of your responsibility for the SA record is not appropriate

8. In function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE

* Select the [Del] button. The work list entry will be deleted
