---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam144030
public_updated_at: '2026-07-22T01:00:00+01:00'
section_id: SAM144030
title: "Making Tax Digital for income tax Self-Assessment: digital exemptions: after\
  \ a customer has applied for a digital exemption \u2013 what happens next? "
---

HMRC will aim to respond within 28 calendar days of
receiving their application. It may take longer if we
need them to provide more information.

When
reviewing their application, HMRC may:

* verify the information they have provided to
  confirm it is accurate
* ask them for more information, if we
  need any

We’ll then send them a letter confirming if their
application for digital exemption has been accepted or not and what they
need to do next.

If they receive a decision before 1 April 2026, it
will take legal effect from 1 April 2026.

### If HMRC accept their application

The letter will explain the type of exemption and how long
it will last.

If they are exempt until April 2027, they will not need to
sign up and use Making Tax Digital for Income Tax until the 2027 to 2028 tax
year at the earliest.

Whilst they are exempt during the 2026 to 2027 tax year,
they will remain on the current late payment and late filing
penalties for Self-Assessment.

If their exemption is
temporary, they will need to sign up and use Making Tax Digital for
Income Tax if their qualifying income is above the relevant
threshold.

If the customer or primary agent submits a digital
exemption application and has further questions in relation to
their application, follow Making Tax Digital ITSA: Request for Digital Exclusion - Step 1

### If HMRC does not accept their application and they disagree with the decision

If their application is not
accepted, their decision letter will explain why and how to
appeal.

When they must appeal depends on
when they receive a decision letter.

### If they get a decision before 1 April 2026

They must appeal by 30 April 2026.

HMRC will start to review these appeals from 1 April
2026.

### If they get a decision on or after 1 April 2026

They can appeal up to 30 days after the date on the
letter.

If they need more time to appeal:

* if they are appealing for themselves or
  on behalf of a friend or family member,they
  must call or write to us
* if they are an agent applying on behalf of someone
  else, contact the Agent Dedicated Line

They need to send their appeal in writing
and:

* use the title ‘Making Tax Digital for Income Tax — digitally
  excluded appeal’ for a digitally excluded exemption appeal
* use the title ‘Making Tax Digital — exemption appeal’ for
  any other exemption appeal
* send it to the address provided in their decision
  letter and include any new information they want us to consider

If you are a decision maker processing a digital exemption
claim, follow MTD ITSA Digital Exclusion – Decision Makers - Step 1

Note: Only authorised Decision Makers can deal with MTD
Digital Exclusion claims.

### Customer has a change in circumstance

If they have already signed up to MTD
ITSA and their circumstances have changed, they should
apply for an exemption and continue to use Making Tax Digital for Income Tax
whilst they wait to hear from us.

If they have signed up to MTD
ITSA voluntarily and think they have become
exempt, they should opt out using their HMRC online
services account.

They may have been granted a digital exemption, which
is about to cease, or has now ceased.

They will need to notify
us if their circumstances have changed and they can
now:

* keep digital records, and
* send updates to HMRC each quarter using compatible
  software

If they believe they should still be
digitally exempt, they can re-apply by either calling or writing to HMRC, using the contact
details in Self-Assessment general
enquiries.
