---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam122201
public_updated_at: '2022-09-05T09:39:40+01:00'
section_id: SAM122201
title: 'Returns: partnership returns: paper reports: partnerships (Action Guide)'
---

Where a paper report is received follow steps 1 - 19 below. This guide is presented as follows

[LDC Returns - Logging Failures - No record found](#IDAGYTPE) - Steps 1 - 6  
[LDC Returns To Be Deleted List](#IDAI2TPE) - Steps 7 -13  
[Deleted Returns List](#IDAHCUPE) - Steps 14 - 15  
[LDC Returns List](#IDA2DUPE) - Step 16  
[LDC Returns - Capture Failures - No record found](#IDASEUPE) - Steps 17 - 19

For details of how to access any of the SA functions, select ‘Index Of Functions’ on the left of the screen.

## LDC Returns - Logging Failures - No record found

If the list is received in a Debt Management office the return will have been sent on and the list may be ignored. Capturing the return in the responsible office will log it

1. Use function LOG RETURN to log the return correctly where you are able to trace the correct Unique Taxpayer Reference (UTR)

2. Use function CAPTURE RETURN to enter the return information using the correct UTR

3. Delete the entry from the list

#### Where the Organisation Unit Identifier (OUID) used in LOG RETURN is invalid

4. Ask your Local Administrator to correct the OUID using function LDC ADMIN 2000

5. Use function LOG RETURN to log the return using the correct OUID

6. Delete the entry from the list

## LDC Returns To Be Deleted List

7. Review each entry on the list carefully

8. Check the return to see why capture has not been fully completed

#### If the return is unsatisfactory but still logged

9. Unlog the return using function UNLOG RETURN. Refer to subject ‘Unsatisfactory Partnership Returns’ ([SAM122160](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam122160)) for more information

#### If entries are illegible and the nominated partner or agent has been contacted but a reply is still outstanding

10. Consider treating as unsatisfactory and unlog the return. Refer to subject ‘Unsatisfactory Partnership Returns’ ([SAM122160](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam122160)) for more information

#### If you consider the return is not unsatisfactory and you are able to repair the entry or accept the figure (SAM122165)

11. Complete capture of the return using function CAPTURE RETURN

#### If the nominated partner or agent has been contacted concerning an obvious error and a reply is still outstanding

12. Use your judgement to repair or accept the entry

13. Complete capture of the return using function CAPTURE RETURN

## Deleted Returns List

All cases on the list should have been reviewed on receipt of the LDC RETURNS TO BE DELETED LIST. The only entries on this list should be for returns that were unsatisfactory and have been unlogged

14. Review all entries on the list carefully to ensure positive action has been taken to obtain a satisfactory return

15. On receipt of the satisfactory return, log and capture the return details in full using functions LOG RETURN and CAPTURE RETURN

## LDC Returns List

16. This list has been requested by the Office Manager for management purposes. He or she will advise any action to be taken

## LDC Returns - Capture Failures - No record found

17. Where you are able to trace the correct Unique Taxpayer reference (UTR)

* Use function CAPTURE RETURN to enter the return details using the correct UTR

18. Where the Organisation Unit Identifier (OUID) used in CAPTURE RETURN is invalid

* Ask your LDC Administrator to correct the OUID using function LDC ADMIN 2000
* Use function CAPTURE RETURN to enter the return details using the correct OUID

19. Delete the entry from the list
