---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam121268
public_updated_at: '2026-03-09T00:00:00+00:00'
section_id: SAM121268
title: 'Returns: individual returns: auto-coding'
---

Auto-coding functionality will be introduced
from 6 April 2010 to automatically trigger a PAYE tax code following

* Capture
  of a paper return, either an original or an amendment

Or

* Receipt
  of an online return, whether and original or an amendment

When returns and amendments for CY-1 are
received and processed, the information will be passed to PAYE for auto-coding
where

* The
  return shows a PAYE source of income **and** there is a PAYE link on
  the SA record

**Or**

* The
  amendment includes employment income, **and**
* There
  is no PAYE link on the record, **and**
* The
  ‘Final Return Year’ signal is set on the SA record, **and**
* The
  final return year is the same as the year of the amended return, **and**
* There
  is an automatic note held on the SA record to show the SA record was
  closed following refinement

**Note:** No Auto coding updates are sent during the
period from the beginning of January to 5 April each year.

Details of the information used in the
auto-coding process can be found in the following documents

Auto-coding SA100 2023-2024

Auto-coding SA200 2023-2024

The are two exceptions to this

* Where
  the SA record is marked ‘deceased’ and the signal is set, no information
  will be passed to the National Insurance and PAYE Service (NPS)
* Where
  the item has been updated since the Annual Coding review. In this
  scenario, auto coding will **not** overwrite that amount with the
  amount on the return

Any information relevant to the code shown in
the Additional Notes space of the return **must** be used to update the NPS
IABD screen at the time of processing so that NPS can pick this information up.

Information will be sent over to NPS on a
daily basis. If a return is amended more than once on the same day, only the
information from the latest amendment will be passed to NPS. For further
information, see the PAYE Manual at PAYE13150.

## Inhibit auto-coding signal

This signal, also known as the Automatic
Coding Inhibited (ACI) signal, will exclude the case from auto-coding on a
permanent basis and an SA note must be made when the signal is set giving a
reason why. The signal will permanently stop any information being passed to
NPS whenever a return or amendment is processed.

The ACI signal is only to be used by work
areas that have an agreed concession. They will confirm that they have set the
signal in an SA Note. If you do not work in one of these business area’s do not
set the signal.

When reviewing a record which shows the
signal, check SA Notes for confirmation of why the signal has been set and who
by. If there is no note and you are unable to find the reason for it, unset the
signal.

**Note:** The use of this signal will cause work list
entries to be created so if you have not been authorised to do so, you should
avoid setting this signal where another course of action is more appropriate.

More appropriate actions are

* Following
  the guidance for coding deductions and expenses at PAYE12000 onwards where
  the customer claims uncertainty as a reason for requesting that the signal
  should be set
* Removing
  the customer from Self Assessment where they say they are no longer within
  SA criteria
* Including
  the appropriate restriction in the PAYE code. If an appropriate
  restriction is included in the code, the customer may no longer be
  required to complete a self assessment return as the auto refinement rules
  would close the SA record and then the inhibit auto coding signal would no
  longer be required

## Exceptions

Entries will appear on work list W052 ‘SA/PAYE
auto-coding exceptions’ where

* There
  are discrepancies for NIB and / or underpayments coded

And / or

* The
  following return pages have been completed

* Minister
  of Religion
* Member
  of Parliament, Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly or Legislative Assembly
  for Northern Ireland

And / or

* The
  inhibit auto-coding signal is set

Where the inhibit auto-coding signal is not
set, auto-coding will still take place, even if there is an entry on work list
W052.
