---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam125210
public_updated_at: '2026-03-19T00:00:00+00:00'
section_id: SAM125210
title: 'Returns: returns work lists: W055 failed online amendments'
---

A work item will be entered on the ‘Failed Online Amendments’ Work List where an online amendment is received and

* There is an open or closed enquiry for the return year

Or

* The return does not have a status of captured because
  + The return has not been received
  + The return has been unlogged
  + The return is logged but not yet captured
  + A charge for the return year has been created using CREATE RETURN CHARGE

Or

* The amendment relates to a partnership return for which a draft amendment already exists

**Note:** If an online amendment is received more than 12 months following the statutory due date for that return, a customer service message will advise the customer that the amendment window has closed for that year.

The work list is allocated to either the office with technical responsibility or the office with processing responsibility.

If a work item is created because there is an open or closed enquiry or where a draft amendment already exists for a partnership return, it will be allocated to the work list in the office with technical responsibility and reviewed by a Clerical Case Worker. After reviewing the work item, the Technical office may reallocate it to the Processing office work list if appropriate.

A work item is created because the return for the return year does not have a status of captured, will be allocated to the office with processing responsibility and reviewed by a Clerical Processing Officer.

A work item is created where a change of status is notified from Citizens Identification Framework, where there is an open or closed enquiry for the return year, and an amendment to the return is submitted.

**Note:** Taxpayer status details will be pre-populated on the return and will show STp for Scottish taxpayers, WTp for Welsh taxpayers or England and Northern Ireland for everyone else.

The work items appearing on this work list in both the Technical and Processing offices are for immediate action and the work items must be deleted manually.

Further information on this work list can be found in the section ‘Work management’, subject ‘W055 Failed online amendments’ ([SAM71159](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam71159)) and the Action Guide can be found here.
