---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam103023
public_updated_at: '2025-11-20T00:00:00+00:00'
section_id: SAM103023
title: 'Records: movement of taxpayer records: transfer of CPR record - action in
  local office (Action Guide)'
---

To **transfer out** a Complex Personal Return (CPR) record to a CPR Team follow steps 1 - 14 below.

On receipt of a record **transferred in** from a CPR Team follow steps 15- 18 below.

The guide is presented as follows

#### Action in local office - Transfer out

[Transferring SA / PAYE linked record to CPR Team where record is held in the same office as the CPR Team](#IDA2H1ED) - Steps 1 - 3  
[Transferring SA / PAYE linked record to CPR Team where record is not held in the same office as the CPR team](#IDANK1ED) - Steps 4 - 9  
[Transferring SA only records to CPR Team](#IDA4P1ED) - Steps 10 - 13  
[Transferring paper records to CPR Team](#IDAST1ED) - Step 14

#### Action in local office - Transfer in

[On receipt of record in local office](#IDATV1ED) - Steps 15 - 18

#### Action in local office - Transfer out

## Transferring SA / PAYE linked record to CPR Team where record is held in the same office as the CPR Team

1.  Use PAYE Service Function CONTACT HISTORY to enter the note ‘Complex Personal Return (CPR) case dealt with in (CPR Team Name, full address and telephone number)’

2.  Use Function MAINTAIN SA NOTES to enter the note ‘SA record transferred from [your office name] to [CPR Team name]’

3.  Transfer PAYE and SA responsibility to the CPR Team

## Transferring SA / PAYE linked record to CPR Team where record is not held in the same office as the CPR team

4.  Break the SA / PAYE link. To do this

* Use function AMEND TAXPAYER SIGNALS to set the Final Year Return Signal and SA Entry/Exit letter Inhibited Signal
* Wait for the link to be broken usually overnight but occasionally may take longer
* Check the PAYE record if the SA signal is no longer present the link has been broken

5.  Update PAYE Service Function CONTACT HISTORY with the note ‘Complex Personal Return Case dealt with in (CPR Team name, full address and telephone number’

6.  Use Function MAINTAIN SA NOTES to enter the note ‘SA record transferred from (your office name ) to (CPR Team name)‘

7.  Use Function MAINTAIN RESPONSIBLE OFFICE to transfer responsibility for the SA record to the CPR Team

8.  Prepare a sub-file and mark it clearly that the CPR Team has responsibility for the record and that any correspondence must be passed to that office

9.  Enter details of the case in the Electronic Shared Folder held within your office

## Transferring SA only records to CPR Team

**Note:** This applies where the case is pure SA and there is no PAYE record

10.  Use Function MAINTAIN SA NOTES to enter the note ‘SA record transferred from [your office name] to [CPR Team name]’

11.  Use Function MAINTAIN RESPONSIBLE OFFICE to transfer responsibility for the case to the CPR Team

12.  Prepare a sub-file and mark it clearly that the CPR Team has responsibility for the record and that any correspondence **must** be passed to that office

13.  Enter details of the case in the Electronic Shared Folder held within your office

## Transferring paper records to CPR Team

14.  Transfer paper records immediately on request, direct via Taxpost. Enter the full name and address of the CPR Team to ensure the papers reach the correct team

**Note:** Under no circumstances should you write to the taxpayer or agent to tell them that the record has been transferred. The CPR Team will issue the necessary introductory letter when they receive the records. If a taxpayer or agent contacts you shortly after transfer, before the CPR Team has issued an introductory letter, tell them that the record is in the process of being transferred and that the new office will contact them shortly to give details. Contact the CPR Team immediately and ask them to ensure there is no delay in issuing the introductory letter

#### Action in local office - Transfer in

## On receipt of record in local office

15.  Carry out **all** the actions required as notified on Stencil B sent to you by the CPR Team

16.  Where the file has been sent to Orton Centre Repository, deal with any papers received in accordance with office practice and record your actions on the record

17.  File Stencil B away

18.  Note the CPR establishment file to show the records have been transferred back from the CPR Team
