---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam22030
public_updated_at: '2016-02-23T15:03:27+00:00'
section_id: SAM22030
title: 'Assessments: non SA assessing: entering charges on SAFE'
---

When the calculation has been made and the SEES assessment letter created, the charge must be created on SAFE by the appropriate person holding the Charge Raiser role (see Safe Security Guide SSG0500 - SAFE charges).

To ensure DMB are aware of what interest rules apply, you must remember to enter the legislation name in the ‘local reference’ field of SAFE, for example, the assessment raisers PID/legislation name - [PID]/S963 ITA 07.

The ‘Charge Type’ will be ‘Income Tax Assessed’.

You must use Print Payslip to create the payslip for issue with the SEES assessment letter.

If the charge currently exists on SAFE, the SAFE accounting record must be updated by the nominated SAFE user.

## Archived records for CODA assessments

Existing CODA assessment details have been archived to a central Controlled Access Folder (CAF). Access to this CAF will be managed and controlled by Local Compliance and Specialist PT. Charge details will be held in a CAF owned by DMB. This archive is called the D E Archive.

The Archived data is stored on two ‘Read Only’ Controlled Access Folders (CAFs). One CAF contains folders for Schedule D/E, HEP, CTA, CTC and ACT/IT-CP and the other CAF for CODA. Access to the multiple system CAF can be gained by contacting the Information Manager for your directorate. The CODA data will be kept separate from the other systems and access to this CAF will be controlled by Local Compliance and Specialist PT (PT International).

Access permissions have been given to Specialist PT and Local Compliance. If you are working within these departments and don’t know who your nominated access staff are, please send an e-mail to the [LC PGC, Corporate Infrastructure (LocalCOMP LC Group Mailbox)](mailto:3182576) mailbox. You must show the title ‘CODA Request’ in the Subject box.

If you are working outside Local Compliance and Specialist PT and require access, you will have to send your request to Local Compliance as above. Note: No access permissions are held within PT Operations.

It is important that you check both the charge status and the assessment details before taking action.

If the charge has been archived, any amendment to the charge will be recorded and any repayment request actioned by sending the Repayment Stencil (SAFE 1(new)) and the Charge Amendment Stencil (SAFE 2(new)) to the Work Area Mailbox (WAM) entitled DMB Banking and Tracing WAM, under the Compliance work area using the heading ‘SAFE Repayment’. You must quote the full SAFE or Accounts Office reference if the charge was cleared pre-SAFE. For individuals, use the format - last name, title and first name.

The SAFE stencils can be found on the Strategic Accounting Framework Environment (SAFE) website. This site can be found by following the A to Z index on the Intranet.
