---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam61280
public_updated_at: '2016-02-23T15:15:47+00:00'
section_id: SAM61280
title: 'Interest, penalties and surcharge: penalties: clerically raising penalties
  for years prior to CY-4'
---

From April 2012, the system will automatically impose penalties for a maximum of four ‘in-date’ tax return years, for example in 2014-15, the system can still automatically apply a penalty for a late 2010-11 tax return. However, there may be some situations where a penalty is due for a tax year prior to CY-4 and you will need to raise these clerically. For example

* For a return issued when the return year is CY-4, for example a 2010-11 tax return issued in 2014-15. Dependent on when the return was issued during 2014-15, some penalties may have been issued but not all. You will need to review the penalty position and manually raise any that fall outside the automatic period
* A determination made for the return year CY-4 or earlier, for example a 2010-11 determination made in 2014-15
* A return received, for example in response to the issue of a determination when the year of the return is CY-5 or earlier
* Where there is a change to the liability, for example following an ‘in-time’ claim to relief or amendment when the return year is CY-5 or earlier
* Where an informal or formal standover against a penalty is released and the return year is prior to CY-4
* Where a customer’s address(s) was RLS and a new address has been found and penalties need to be charged for a tax year prior to CY-4

These types of cases are unusual, but when the penalties arise you will need to apply penalty charges clerically by creating a miscellaneous penalty charge, using function CREATE SUNDRY CHARGE. You will need to create separate miscellaneous penalty charges for each different penalty charge due. Note: You may also need to consider manually issuing daily penalty reminders if daily penalties are accruing and a notice of penalty assessment has not been issued.

### For example

* 2010-11 tax return issued on 03/02/2015
* Return due date is 10/05/2015 (3 months and 7 days from the date of issue)
* Return received 18/08/2015

The customer should be charged £100 late filing fixed penalty and £80 daily penalty. Daily penalties start to accrue on 11/08/2015 (3 months after the return due date) so the charge is £10 per day x 8 days = £80.

The system cannot automatically apply penalties for 2010-11 in the tax year 2015-16 so you will need to apply the penalty charges clerically by creating a miscellaneous penalty using function CREATE SUNDRY CHARGE. Separate charges will need to be created in this case for the £100 late filing fixed penalty and £80 daily penalty.

For information on how to raise and amend manual penalties, see subject ‘Manually raising a penalty’ (Action Guide) ([SAM61281](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam61281)).

More information about the time limits for the issue of returns can be found at [SAM121080](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam121080).

More information about the different penalties that may be charged can be found at [SAM61200](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam61200) onwards.
