---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam71084
public_updated_at: '2016-02-23T15:16:08+00:00'
section_id: SAM71084
title: 'Manage work: work management: W011 review remission  for cancellation'
---

Event

A work item is created when a remission is present on the SA record, and either

* A payment is received

Or

* A transfer from OAS is made

Or

* A new or increased balancing charge credit is createdThe remission may be appropriate for cancellation.

Specific details

Other than details common or potentially common to all types of work item, no specific details will be available.

Allocation of responsibility

The work item is allocated to the Recovery Office for the taxpayer. Within that office, the item will be worked by an officer with the user role of Charge Remitter.

Frequency of review

It is recommended that this list is reviewed daily.

Updating of details

Until the work item is cleared, the following details held on the work item are updated by Work Management immediately the corresponding entry is updated on the taxpayer record

* Taxpayer name
* NINO
* Employers reference (EMPREF) or Schedule D register number

Action to take on the work item

Advice on the action to take to clear the work item is available in the Debt Management & Banking Manual (DMBM).

Deletion of the work item

The work item is deleted automatically when the remission is cancelled. It should otherwise be deleted manually using function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE, on completion of the necessary clerical action.
