---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam71163
public_updated_at: '2023-11-27T12:40:47+00:00'
section_id: SAM71163
title: 'Manage work: work management: W059 online return rejections'
---

[Event](#IDAOT31H)  
[Specific details](#IDAWT31H)  
[Allocation of responsibility](#IDAEU31H)  
[Frequency of review](#IDAMU31H)  
[Updating details](#IDAUU31H)  
[Action to take on the work item](#IDAMV31H)  
[Deletion of the work item](#IDA0V31H)

## Event

A work item is created where a return or an amendment filed online has been rejected and needs to be reviewed to correct the error that prevented its successful capture. Work items will be created for all years where it is possible to file online. The return will keep its ‘E’ status after the work item has been dealt with. Further information can be found at `W059 Online return rejections’ ([SAM125240](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam125240)).

## Specific details

Other than details common or potentially common to all types of work item, the following specific details will be available

* Return year

## Allocation of responsibility

The work item is allocated to the office with processing responsibility for the taxpayer. Within that office the item will be worked by an officer with the user role of Clerical Processing Officer.

## Frequency of review

This list must be reviewed as directed.

## Updating details

Until the work item is cleared, Work Management updates the following details held on the work item immediately the corresponding entry is updated on the taxpayer record

* Taxpayer name
* NINO
* Employer reference (EMPREF) or Schedule D register number

## Action to take on the work item

Action to take to clear the work item is available  - see W059
- online return rejections

## Deletion of the work item

The work item is deleted automatically when any of the following occur

* The return is fully captured in Local Data Capture (LDC)
* The liability is entered using function CREATE RETURN CHARGE. **Note:** If the entry is not worked before the time limit set for the tax year of that entry, using this function will **not** delete the work item. The work list item will become permanent and cannot be removed
* The return is unlogged

The work item **cannot** be manually deleted.
