---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam71134
public_updated_at: '2016-03-14T15:47:06+00:00'
section_id: SAM71134
title: 'Manage work: work management: W042 returns not captured'
---

## Event

Prior to April 2015, a work item was usually created when Individual, Partnership, Trust and Pension Scheme returns had been logged for more than 45 days. This period was reduced between 31 October and December to list returns which have been logged on, or before, 31 October to enable those returns to be captured in time for the liability to be included on the December statement.

From April 2015, a new function was introduced called ‘Maintain OU Delay Period’ which can be used by managers of Return Capture teams to amend the 45 day parameter, in line with daily fluctuations in the Return Capture team workload. This will ensure that no cases are added to the worklist where the Capture teams simply have a backlog of returns on hand.

## Specific details

Other than details common or potentially common to all types of work item, the following specific details will be available

* Date logged
* Organisation Unit that logged the return (if not the owning office with processing responsibility)
* Year
* Taxpayer Type
* Operator ID (of the person that logged the return)

## Allocation of responsibility

The work item is allocated to the office with processing responsibility for the taxpayer. Within that office, the item will be worked by an officer with the user role of Clerical Processing Officer.

## Frequency of review

This list should be reviewed as directed.

## Updating details

Until the work item is cleared, the following details held on the work item are updated by Work Management immediately the corresponding entry is updated on the taxpayer record

* Taxpayer name
* NINO
* Employers reference (EMPREF) or Schedule D register number

## Action to take on the work item

Advice on the action to take to clear the work item is available in the section ‘Returns Work Lists’, ([SAM125131](https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam125131)).

## Deletion of the work item

The work item is deleted automatically when any of the following occur

* The return is fully captured in Local Data Capture (LDC)
* The liability is entered using function CREATE RETURN CHARGE (for Individuals and Trusts)
* The return is unlogged

The work item cannot be deleted manually.
