---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam71128
public_updated_at: '2016-03-14T15:39:44+00:00'
section_id: SAM71128
title: 'Manage work: work management: W039 potential non-filers'
---

Note: This work list is currently unavailable in offices.

Event

A work item is created by a batch function that will be run at intervals between October and December each year. Effectively the selected cases are those for which a reminder would be issued if the batch function was used for that purpose at that time.

Specific details

Other than details common or potentially common to all types of work item, the following specific details will be available where appropriate

* Date PY return filed
* Agent identifier
* Agent name
* Agent telephone number
* Client reference
* Deceased signal set
* Capacity name

Allocation of responsibility

The work item is allocated to the office with processing responsibility for the taxpayer. Within that office, the item will be worked by an officer with the user role of Clerical Processing Officer.

Updating of details

Until the work item is cleared, the following details held on the work item are updated by Work Management immediately the corresponding entry is updated on the taxpayer record

* Taxpayer name
* NINO
* Employers reference (EMPREF) or Schedule D register number
* Taxpayer telephone number

Deletion of the work item

The work item is deleted automatically when the return is logged or captured. It can be deleted manually, using function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE.

In January each year, when the Work List ceases to serve a purpose, all work items will be automatically deleted.
