---
base_path: /hmrc-internal-manuals/self-assessment-manual/sam71086
public_updated_at: '2016-02-23T15:16:08+00:00'
section_id: SAM71086
title: 'Manage work: work management: W012 remissions and remission cancellation quality
  assurance'
---

Event

A work item is created when a remission is created or cancelled on the SA record. This includes remission cancellations created automatically when a charge amendment, reducing the charge, is posted to a record. The reason for creation will be shown as one of the following

* Cancelled - Manually
* Cancelled - Automatic
* Created

Specific details

Other than details common or potentially common to all types of work item, the following specific details will be available

* Posting date
* Remission or remission cancellation amount
* Remission class
* Reason for creation

Allocation of responsibility

The work item is allocated to the Recovery Office for the taxpayer. Within that office, the item will be worked by an officer with the user role of Work List Manager.

Frequency of review

This list should be reviewed as advised by Regional Executive Office.

Updating of details

Until the work item is cleared, the following details held on the work item are updated by Work Management immediately the corresponding entry is updated on the taxpayer record

* Taxpayer name
* NINO
* Employers reference (EMPREF) or Schedule D register number

Action to take on the work item

Advice on the action to take to clear the work item is available in the Debt Management & Banking Manual (DMBM).

Deletion of the work item

The work item is not deleted automatically. It should be deleted manually using function WORK LIST CASES or function SELECTED CASE, on completion of the necessary clerical action.
